# Email Campaign Development Process

Here I will try to outline a general series of steps that marketers should follow when designing, developing, and executing a marketing campaign, with the email channel as a main focus. Of course, this must be considered as a part within the whole marketing department, but this is what matters to those who are creating the emails. Following this process will reduce the mistakes made, keep the campaign completion date on track, and save time by gathering all requirements early.

## 1. Campaign Need Identification

Marketing listens closely to other business departments such as sales, to the customers, and trends happening throughout the world. One of these factors might cause someone in marketing to come up with a new campaign idea. Customers are complaining about a lack of onboarding process. Sales needs support to help qualify leads, or the messaging is inconsistent and leaving prospects confused. Perhaps there's a trend related to your industry or target market that you wish to capitalize on. Maybe a competitor's campaign inspired you, and now you want one. Whatever the reason is, it becomes the kernel for a new campaign. You identify the needs for a campaign that you wish to execute upon. If that campaign requires the use of the email channel, keep that idea in mind, and let's proceed to the next step.

## 2. Initial Strategy Discussion

If you're a team of one, you might have a brainstorming discussion with yourself where you write down different ideas of what you want to do. If you have others on your team, bring them together and gather their input and how they want to see the campaign executed. When do you want it done by? What channels should we be using? What is our budget? Do we have enough bandwidth to support this on top of our other priorities? How long will the development take? Will this be a brand new campaign, or an improvement on an existing campaign running today? Are there any potential legal complications? Should get gather feedback from sales? Who are all of the potential stakeholders?

As the discussions continue, the idea should move from an abstract concept to something more concrete. You're able to discretely demonstrate how many emails you will need, what you generally want them to say, what you want them to look like, who should receive them, and at what point in the customer journey they should receive them. How you facilitate these discussions is up to you and your team dynamic. Creativity is great, but be realistic and don't get lost on tangents that don't address the current needs. Every moment that goes by could mean a lost opportunity because you didn't execute on your campaign sooner!

## 3. Draft The Requirements \(Email Requirements Elicitation/ERE\)

[Requirements Elicitation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Requirements_elicitation), or "requirements gathering" comes from the [software engineering](http://searchsoftwarequality.techtarget.com/feature/Use-elicitation-techniques-to-discover-software-requirements) and [business analysis](http://www.modernanalyst.com/Resources/Articles/tabid/115/ID/1427/An-Overview-of-Requirements-Elicitation.aspx) world. However, the basic concepts apply well to email development. In marketing, because there are many ways to go about one campaign, it's important to understand exactly what the executives, customers, and your own team want to see. No, we don't need to have focus groups, surveys, workshops, or analysis \(if you have time for that great, but that should be part of your overall yearly marketing plan\). But what is important is that everyone is on the same page about what will be sent. To make the process go faster, and to reduce the need for additional meetings, it's important to get the following questions answered. In fact, I'll provide my own Word document that includes the following:

